---
title: "Nine Rules for Trading"
layout: page
date: "2019-12-12 00:00:00 -0000"
---

{{ page.date | date: '%B %d, %Y' }}

From 2012-2017 I worked in fixed-income trading at Bank of America. My experience managing repo and government bond trading books, as well as my personal portfolio, have taught me a few rules to follow. In 2016 I wrote down nine of these. Here they are along with some supporting quotes from books I have read.

**1.** Have a plan. Put a stop and target on it. Keep a journal with the reasons for a trade and the P&L associated with it.

<br>

**2.** Is the trade in alignment with your longer-term view? If not the valuation needs to be exceptionally compelling.

<br>

**3.** Wait for high conviction trades, and be big. They only come along once every so often. Do not feel like you need to trade if you do not have conviction.

<br>

**4.** When the consensus is all one way, the market has already moved, and will not move further in that direction even if an economic release or event occurs as expected.

<br>

<center>
<i>"Big price movements happen when market participants evaluate prejudices, not when world the changes that much."</i> (Colm O'Shea, Hedge Fund Market Wizards)
</center>

<br>

**5.**   Is the thing you are trading sufficiently correlated to what view you want to express?

<br>

<center>
<i>*"When things are going badly for reasons you don't understand, cut the trade."</i> (Porter, Inside the House of Money)
</center>

<br>

**6.** Take risk in liquid instruments.

<br>

**7.** Markets have a tendency to trend.

<br>

<center><i>"One of the only things I could say with certainty was that markets trend because I can observe trends in any financial market, in any time era."</i> (Michael Platt, Hedge Fund Market Wizards) </center>

<br>

**8.** If you really like a trade, get in it even if it costs you a tiny amount ("don't be a dick for a tick").

<br>

**9.** If you disagree with the market, on what basis is this? Economists and market participants are smart people and likely know more about forecasting and economics than you do.