---
title: "drop=FALSE in R"
layout: page
date: "2021-01-11 00:00:00 -0000"
---

{{ page.date | date: '%B %d, %Y' }}

I have not done any blog posts on coding tips/tricks, but after discovering the magic of `drop=FALSE` I just had to post. Well, it's not really magic, it just overcomes one of the most frustrating quirks of R I have come across so far.

Let's take an example to demonstrate this quirk. Let's take a 3x2 matrix, select the first two rows, and then take the sum of the rows. This is easy to do in R, and the following code runs just fine.

    > example_matrix_1
         [,1] [,2]
    [1,]    1    4
    [2,]    2    5
    [3,]    3    6
    
    > example_matrix_1[1:2,]
          [,1] [,2]
    [1,]    1    4
    [2,]    2    5
    
    > rowSums(example_matrix_1[1:2,])
    [1] 5 7

Now, one would think if the matrix we used in the above example was a 3x1 matrix the code would run. Unfortunately this is not the case.

    > example_matrix_2
         [,1]
    [1,]    1
    [2,]    2
    [3,]    3
    
    > example_matrix_2[1:2,]
    [1] 1 2
    
    > rowSums(example_matrix_2[1:2,])
    Error in rowSums(example_matrix_2[1:2, ]) : 'x' must be an array of at least two dimensions

What happened? Well, in all of its infinite wisdom R decided that when we take the first two rows of our matrix `example_matrix_2` we want a vector as an output, and not a 2x1 matrix. This makes no sense, but it is what R does.

So, how do we rectify this? This is where the handy `drop=FALSE` command comes into play. Essentially when subsetting the one dimensional matrix we include `drop=FALSE` to make the output a one dimensional matrix.

    > example_matrix_2[1:2,,drop=FALSE]
         [,1]
    [1,]    1
    [2,]    2
    
    > rowSums(example_matrix_2[1:2,,drop=FALSE])
    [1] 1 2


I only wish I had known this a year ago, and then would have avoided a great deal of frustration!